[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I have a very personal question to
ask you.
Well, we've known each other for a very
long time, so there's not much left that
we don't know, but go for it.
>> Well, I actually don't know the answer
to this question. Um, have you ever
baked anything?
>> Uh,
not that much. I went through this like
I'm just going to The answer is
basically no. I'm just No.
>> Wait, you were going to say something.
You went through a phase. One time in
high school, I got in this like weird
like experimental baking obsession with
a friend of mine where we just sort of
tried to relearn baking by first
principles and see what worked.
>> Oh my god, what does that mean?
>> Just like not reading any recipe. I just
So, not reading any recipes and just
start experimenting and then seeing like
what caused things to rise and what
tasted good without any starting
principles or anything. We knew a few
basic ingredients. It's fun. I should
get back into baking.
>> You should. It's really fun.
>> What do you Tracy? We know this is just
a setup because you want to talk about
your baking. So, why don't you just why
don't you just tell us what you like to
bake?
>> Hey, look. I don't bake that much.
Actually, in my household, my husband
bakes everything. So, he does a really
good Basque cheesecake, really good
chocolate chip cookies, things like
that. But if you were doing first
principle baking, I imagine you know how
difficult it is and all the things that
are involved in just making like a
simple loaf of bread.
>> Uh, I I I am aware. And the other thing
is not only um I understand that it's uh
very complex but beyond that I'm always
flabbergasted at the idea of doing it at
industrial scale or semi-industrial
scale and how that even works. I have no
idea to be honest. Honestly, industrial
scale food preparation at all seems
crazy to me. Like stakes and everything
like how do you do it over and over and
over again and get a repeatable process
is like a fascinating question to me.
>> Right. So that's really interesting in
and of itself. But the other interesting
thing about the baking business at
industrial scale as you just pointed out
is it's kind of a microcosm for the
economy. You have all these commodity
inputs which obviously move around along
with inflation. You have labor issues.
You have to get bakers who want to get
into work really really early in the
morning and obviously you also have
consumer demand. So it's really an
interesting lens to kind of look
through. Well, one of our uh one of our
the favorite episodes that we've ever
done I which I think was 2022 or maybe
2021,
>> long time ago.
>> Uh we talked to a commercial baker in
Chicago and I've always wanted to do
more. That was such a pivotal episode
for us and I was like, well, you know,
we learned a lot about what was going on
with uh commodity costs. We learned a
lot what was going on with pricing
power, etc. Well, it's 2025 now. I would
like to learn more about what's going
on.
>> All right, so we're going to dive back
into baking. Uh, possibly not on a first
principle basis, but we have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Andy Kaden. He
>> wouldn't baking baking from first
principles be a really good That would
be a That would be like a good name for
a cookbook. All right, sorry. Keep
going.
>> Um, good name for a baking podcast,
perhaps. Okay,
>> we're going to be speaking with Andy
Kaden. He is the owner of a bakery in LA
that's called Bub and Grandmas. They do
wholesale orders for a bunch of
different LA restaurants, so industrial
scale as you mentioned, Joe, but they
also have a retail restaurant that does
sandwiches and they're in the process of
opening a pizzeria. So amazing,
>> all the baked goods. Andy, welcome to
the show.
>> Really good to be here. Thanks for
having me.
>> Shall we start out with where did your
interest in bread actually come from?
Was this like a COVID trope where
everyone started doing their own
sourdough and got really into
carbohydrates
>> or I I maybe I'm a little uh uh
protocoid in my obsession. I was a
writer in advertising and TV for about a
decade after school and learned fairly
quickly after I got to Los Angeles about
16 years ago that I hated it and hated
myself for contributing to sort of the
advertising culture. so to speak, and I
needed to escape and uh always had an
obsession with cooking and eating and um
decided to focus on something that I saw
missing from the Los Angeles landscape
after I moved here from the East Coast.
I grew up in New Jersey, kind of in a
Italian Jewish sandwich mecca. uh and
saw saw that there was sort of a a a
glaring absence of those style of kind
of walk into it and have a great
sandwich kind of experience in Los
Angeles. There are a few notable spots,
but they aren't everywhere like they are
in New York and New Jersey. So, I
decided to start writing some business
plans and figure out how to open a
sandwich shop here. Um, and you know,
started working at a sandwich shop in
Hollywood called Potato Chips for free
on the weekends, staging at a variety of
bakeries just to try and figure out how
bread worked. And and in that process of
trying to figure out how bread worked,
simply just to talk to bakers about what
I wanted. I started baking daily at home
and got into that pseudocoid rhythm of
daily baking and the obsession of that
that comes from falling into its uh you
know into its grasp and uh you know
started giving away all the bread I was
making and it found its way to a friend
of mine who worked at a local restaurant
and the owner called me out of the blue
and asked if I could make bread for him
daily and I said yes and it hasn't
stopped for 10 years. Wait, so initially
were you just baking bread at scale in
your kitchen?
>> I started as just for me, just as an
experiment. Um, but very quickly kind of
once I had that first account, which was
maybe 6 months after I started baking, 6
months to a year, it the the attention
came quickly and I started needing to
level up over and over and over again.
So, the first place that I I would mix
the bread in my house and ferment it
there and then shape it and take it to a
pizza place around the corner and bake
it in their pizza oven. It was a variety
of these hacked together baking in other
bakeries off hours to get to get things
done. And as the the demand grew very
quickly, I I quickly had to figure out
how to run a business, not just bake a
few loaves of bread out of my house. um
and moved into a semi semi-legitimate
space at about a year and a half.
>> Flash forward to today, zooming out, why
don't you tell us about the size and
scope of your businesses? What do you
have right now just in terms of volume
and number of employees, stuff like
that?
>> The wholesale bakery, which is what that
story evolved into, is now a 50 person
business. We have a 6,500 foot facility
that produces bread, just bread, not
pastry, for about 180 restaurants in Los
Angeles. It's a pretty wide distribution
and we are still trying to grow. We're
kind of wallto-wall in that space and
need to move in the next two years. So,
we're starting to investigate what that
would look like. We also opened a retail
restaurant almost 3 years ago, which is
insane how quickly that 3 years has
passed um in our weird time vortex that
we live within now. And uh that is
another almost 50 person business um in
the Glassel Park neighborhood of Los
Angeles. We are in the process of
opening a pizza place in Highland Park,
a neighboring neighborhood. Um that will
be open hopefully in the next four to
five weeks. So that'll be another 30
employees growing to 50 over time.
>> Why did you decide to do the uh the
retail sandwich shop? Because I imagine
wholesale actually sounds kind of nice
because you're still making a product
but you're divorced from uh face-to-face
interactions with customers which sounds
nice to me but obviously you have a
different opinion.
No, I don't. Um,
I mean, we started with wholesale. We
started in this less sexy, less
customer-f facing environment for the
first, say, 5 years of the business
before we, you know, changed gears to
open the retail restaurant. The
wholesale business is a much more steady
ship. I I sort of describe it as, you
know, you have this big ship. it it's
moving up and down in the in the water,
but ultimately is forward moving. Um,
it's harder to capsize. It's harder to
knock off course, and that makes it a
little bit, let's say, less crazy. The
restaurant business, which was what I
wanted to get into in the first place
had I known what it would be like uh at
the now that I'm there, you know, maybe
wholesale would have been better to stay
at, it's so much harder. It's much more
dynamic. Everything is changing all the
time. much more difficult to isolate the
variables. There's far more variables to
consider in the restaurant, especially
when you bring in customer customer
behaviors and how things really just
consistently fluctuate across the board.
[Music]
One of the themes that comes up in a
range of topics that we talk about is
distribution and actual like both
distribution in terms of sales but also
the physical distribution. How does it
work in Los Angeles? Do you have your
own vans? Are there third parties that
drop off the uh bread to the
restaurants? Like talk about how you
like built up that network and how the
bread physically gets from your
commercial bakery into the restaurants.
>> Sure. Yeah, we have currently we have
six vans that are either leased or owned
and it's been a bit of an excruciating
endeavor building out this whole network
because it is a major major part of what
we do especially because we're
wallto-wall. When I say wall to- wall,
it basically means there is literally no
more oven space per hour available for
for new loaves of bread to increase our
production. So, if you start baking at
2:30 in the morning and you need to get
bread to all of these accounts before
they open at 8:00 a.m., you have a very
narrow window to cool that bread, pack
that bread, get it into the vans, and
get it out to these uh accounts. So, our
ops team at the bakery are true geniuses
in building out these routes because you
have only have this very narrow gap to
hit. And if there's famous LA traffic or
anything else that uh gets backed up in
the baking process, you are scrambling
to try and make sure that you take care
of these accounts in a way where they
can still do their jobs. So we have to
do our job not only just the baking job
but the distribution job before they
show up before anybody else uh from our
accounts show up to work. Also the vans
themselves are you know deeply
problematic. They are the number one
number one thing that breaks needs
service needs attention you know more
even more so than our ovens which are in
near constant use. And we have explored
a number of different options especially
for when we potentially move to a bigger
space about outsourcing our
distribution. Um there are a lot of
upstart wholesale distribution companies
some of which are based in in LA a lot
more in San Francisco that are sort of
taking the Uber approach um and
outsourcing their drivers or having a
dedicated pool of drivers who work with
a variety of different accounts as
opposed to onetoone. So that you know
one of the major issues with our
business is the you know fluctuating
repair and maintenance numbers for our
vans. If we can offload that to someone
else, that is something that we have
certainly looked into. But when we get
into the mix with these conversations,
we always kind of end in the same place
where yes, we are not a con customer,
you know, a consumerf facing company,
but our business relies on that single
interaction between the chefs and our
drivers. They are our point of contact
with our customers. And if that is not
an authentic connection, if that is not
something our employees are connecting
with our customers, there's a potential
for things to go wrong and a potential
for that relationship to be soured. So
we've ultimately stuck with our own
employees and our own vans for now.
>> Tracy, I'm just thinking about how crazy
it must be to like have an interest in
bread such as yourself and then suddenly
like you're in the brake pad
>> become a mechanic.
>> No, you're at the break of repair
business too and you got to take that
into account. No, I was thinking the
same thing. And it's something that I
guess when people envision a bakery, you
don't necessarily think about the uh
transportation and delivery aspect of
it. But Andy, you mentioned 2:30 a.m.
just then and the narrow window for
delivery. And I have to ask,
>> what's it like getting actual workers in
the door who uh who want to, I guess,
wake up at like 1:00 a.m. in the morning
and go bake bread?
>> Yeah, it's uh it's tricky. you know, you
first of all, you have to love it. Um,
you have to love the process. And I
mean, the 230 aspect is is, you know,
very very early and a very very
different lifestyle. Um, in a in a
literal way, you are falling asleep at
5:30 p.m. And that means that your, you
know, connection with your family, your
connection with your friends, you're
operating on a completely different time
zone than they are. And it makes things
complicated if folks are not operating
on the same schedule as you. But you
know the
it's I that was the last baking shift
that I that I did was the Sunday morning
2:30 a.m. bake for the Hollywood Farmers
Market. I would, you know, get up at 2,
roll down to the bakery. It would be
just me in the dark. A lot of people
returning from their various parties on
Saturday night. Um, which made driving
there a little bit sketchy, but always,
you know, being careful. and then, you
know, finish the bake, pack it up, put
it in my truck, and go to the farmers
market and and sell it. Um, and then the
day would wrap up around 2:30. So, it
would be this 12-h hour kind of sprint
and then sale and then come back. And,
you know, at a certain point, it was the
only bake shift that I was doing because
I had to manage the business during the
other days of the week that I was not
doing that. And when you just bake one
day a week at 2:30 in the morning, it
scramles your mind so wildly. and your
sleep schedule that I had to eventually
abandon it just because I needed more
time to manage the businesses. But you
really have to subscribe to the
lifestyle. If you try and push the edge,
you know, especially when I was baking
and managing five days, baking 5 days a
week and still trying to manage the
business was getting sick a lot. It was
very difficult to stay healthy when
you're operating across two, you know,
time zones really. you're you're living
in this kind of uh oh my wife and my
friends are all living in this time zone
and my business is living in this time
zone and I need both I need to be there
for both those were were far more
complicated times for my own health. Uh
but we're on the other side of that now.
We mentioned in the beginning um you
know we like this topic because it's
sort of a lens into everything but what
are you seeing today in terms of you
know if you compare now to when you
started how do think or versus the peak
of the inflation whatever it was how do
things look today when it comes to both
hiring availability and also um raw
commodity cost ingredient costs
>> hiring availability is unique for us uh
obviously we are looking for a very
specialized group of people. So the
skills that they hopefully already have
are in in rare supply in Los Angeles and
uh that makes hiring complicated far
more so for the wholesale bakery than
for the restaurant. The restaurant has a
lot of over the pool is much wider and
we have very little trouble hiring at
the restaurant. um the bakery.
>> Real quickly, is that would you have
said this same thing in 2022 or 2023 or
does it feel easier today than it would
have back then at the at the retail
level? Because that's where that's where
like all the complaints were, right?
Everyone all the restaurants and service
entities were complaining about how
impossible it was.
>> I I think that it's I think that it's
impossible if you don't already have a
name um that people know. Um, and I
think for us, we've spent a lot of our
efforts making sure that our employees
are well taken care of and supported and
treated like the human beings that they
are. Um, and I think that when we open
the restaurant after the bakery, that
was already somewhat established in the
in the public eye. So, um, that helps us
to kind of make this play. I I mean this
is the the point of it all is we want to
make this a desirable place uh for for
people to work so that when they come
here they have a good time, they're well
supported, they get fed, they get
treated well, they have healthcare and
you know we um really built this thing
on that. um it's becoming harder and
harder to have a functional business
including all of those things which is
you know the real issue at hand here is
that the expenses are enumerating and
the um you know sales remain the same.
Um, so when we talk about raw materials,
there's been there's we're actually in a
much better place than we were say a
year ago or even a year before that. The
the bakery goes by one ingredient. It's
flour. Flour flour is wheat and wheat is
uh, you know, a global commodity that
has uh a lot of fluctuations. It's
usually compared to others fairly
steady. But for example, when the Russia
Ukraine war broke out there uh Russia
was not allowing Ukraine's wheat to
leave the country, Ukraine is the sort
of bread basket provider of wheat for
Europe. And when that happens, there's
much more demand coming from the United
States. Prices go up and the American
users of American wheat are the ones who
end up paying more so that those
products end up in Europe to cover for
the loss of supply. Um, so we saw maybe
a 10 10% increase in flower pricing. It
caused us to have to drive our prices up
for the first time uh in a long time
bread-wise. Um uh now it has settled
back down. Uh but in the meantime,
everything else has gotten more
expensive. And you know, there's there's
a um you know, massive wave of
restaurant closures in Los Angeles right
now, including yesterday Kohl's,
117year-old restaurant, announced that
it's closing. The Pantry, which has been
around for 100 years, closed. It's a
very, very, very, very difficult time
for restaurants to thrive, let you know,
survive, let alone thrive in in this
town. So, um interesting times for sure.
[Music]
Just on the commodities front, how does
it work in terms of actually sourcing
things like flour? Do you sign, you
know, forward agreements with suppliers
um at a certain price? And I I guess
like how long-term are those prices set?
Yeah, it's it's um depends very much on
volume and we are in this very unique
sort of middle ground where we are not a
giant 25,000 foot bakery and we are not
one of the sort of more retail oriented
2,000 ft² bakeries. We are in the middle
looking to make this leap to where we
can buy directly from our purveyors and
when we can like purveyors as in
non-distributors directly from King
Arthur directly from Cameas Country Mill
directly from you know a variety of
other flower purveyors and when we can
do those types of things and buy at
scale say 17 to 20 pallets of flour at a
time we can lock in forward pricing with
King Arthur with some of the other ones
but in in the moment now where we're
operating through distributors we are
subject to their markup and They they
are fluctuating what they're doing based
on whatever algorithms they're they're
using to calculate proper pricing not
only just from what they're getting
charged from the you know the actual
producer but also um however their
business is doing and whatever you know
markup they need to to include. So what
we do in that circumstance and what most
restaurants do is regularly pit
distributors against each other for our
business especially because we have a
lot of leverage with our flower orders.
it's it's a fairly significant regular
order. So even if they're making a very
small amount on that uh on each bag
there there's a large volume and a large
frequency that has those purveyors kind
of jockeying for the lower price and
that's there's no service there's no
anything else that that really matters
in that relationship. It's just if you
can get us the price we will order from
you this week and and they know that and
they fight
>> and it's a weekly price. Uh it's it's
more frequent than week weekly at the
moment. There's a little bit of flux.
June June uh you know and I've just have
regular conversations with King Arthur
who's our main bread flour supplier
>> um who are one of the most wonderful
businesses in the country and just good
people and and always you know driven to
to help their uh clients. um they always
are monitoring you know the commodity
future futures and how things are
looking going forward and I will
sometimes reach out to them to find out
you know how how they are pricing things
relative to who they're selling to the
distributors so that I can see if the
the increases in price are coming via
the distributor or via King Arthur and
then I'll know whether I have some
leverage to kind of push down a little
bit further to try and fight for cheaper
But there was a big spike. You know,
things have been trending downward in in
price that that uh the war, you know,
the embargo opened up or whatever it was
that opened up and allowed the wheat to
leave Ukraine. So prices in the states
settled back down because there's less
exports. Um, and it's a um, you know,
something that if you're constantly
monitoring it um, is changing very often
um, in in minor increments, but if you
do that across an entire batch of mil
wheat, that's that's hundreds of
thousands of dollars.
>> So, how does that actually feed into
your prices for bread? Like, and how
dynamic are they? If you get a price
increase um, one day, do you immediately
pass that through to the customer?
>> Almost never. Um and that that's you
know the the increases and decreases are
uh fairly minor at the moment. They are
in flux but they are staying in the
general vicinity. You know if we're
talking specifics we're talking about
somewhere between 15 and 1750 for 150 lb
bag of bread flour. And that fluctuation
it stays in that zone. Maybe a year ago
it was up at 23. And if you think about
that, if we're ordering, let's say,
5,000 pounds a week of flour, it's
actually more than that. I think it's
closer to 6,500 pounds and we're talking
about a fluctuation of a dollar. That is
a massive change in our endofear, you
know, bottom line. So, it's it's the
kind of thing where if there are any
changes whatsoever within that zone,
they're multiplied over a large number
of bags and end up changing things
fairly significantly. So, we really have
to even if it's within that 15 to 17
range as opposed to going all the way up
to $23 a bag, that is um it's crucial
for us to stay on top of it. But in
terms of passing the pricing on, we've
given ourselves a pretty wide range to
stay within that makes our pricing valid
and we're constantly staying on top of
it. But bread in general, the food cost
is not the main issue unless you're
talking about a jump from $15 a bag to
$23 a bag. The main issue is labor
because cogs typically with bread are in
the, you know, 10 to 15% range, which is
the cheapest food product you can
possibly make, even if you're using like
really fantastic ingredients like we
are. The thing is is it just takes a lot
of human beings and a lot of skilled
human beings to execute production. So
if we're talking about the traditional
model where you see like 30% for labor,
we're looking at more 42% for labor and
12% for COGS where COGS typically in a
restaurant food business environment is
somewhere to 25 to 30 if you're doing
okay. We're at 14. So they the model is
a little bit different in the wholesale
universe than it is in the retail
restaurant. and that that is uh you know
we're able to have those extra bodies to
get things done because the cost of
goods are so low.
>> This is fascinating. Let's continue on
this. You're talking about your
wholesale distribution bakery when
you're talking about the restaurant. How
do you think that generally about the
strategy of price increases because
obviously you know you're not going to
be sensitive to the day-to-day or the
monthtomonth. My guess is many most
companies want to pass some sort of
price increase on on a semi-regular
basis maybe once a year or something but
generally like talk about like how
frequently you make those decisions to
incre increase prices and when.
>> Yeah, I I would say that we are less uh
on on a schedule than is typical for a
larger bakery. I think when you get to
scale like us or larger, there's an
inclination just from oper the
operations side of things to make these
these changes regular. And for us, it's
more about making sure that our accounts
are getting what they expect and are not
being pushed further when it's no real
issue for us relative to COGS to float a
little bit of that within a range. It's
also even more relevant to monitor our
competitors pricing. Our products are
not entirely apples to apples talking
about two different basic what we call a
house loaf but most places call a
country loaf basic sourdough loaf of
bread which I you know we charge $6 for
wholesale and a lot of other places
might charge $750 but their loaf is 250
grams heavier than ours or some other
difference. So it's difficult to track
but in terms of what the bottom line is
for our customers we have to stay within
a range. Um we are a higherend wholesale
product which makes us unique as well.
Uh but at the same time that doesn't
mean that we're not competing with those
who are making some more you know sort
of commercially mechanized loaves of
bread. So we have to be very mindful of
our competitors prices. And I would say
that reality mixed with some of the
increases in hogs are what drive our
price increases. I'd say we've raised
prices maybe
twice in the last four years. You know,
I think we we had no choice when bags
were all the way up at $8 more per than
they are now. And by the time we were
able to bring that price back down,
which I think I would say, you know, was
around May of this year. So, it's a
really long time of these elevated
prices. Other expenses like labor and
outside things are have increased to the
point where we can't lower the prices
back down. It's just the way that it
goes. As much as I'd like to because I I
I feel the benefit very, you know, I
feel the benefit from passing savings
off to the to our accounts, but at a
certain a certain point, you have to
protect the business, and that's that's
where we're at. So I mentioned at the
beginning that you're in the process of
opening a pizzeria. So congratulations
on that on the expansion.
>> But one thing we hear a lot about
nowadays is the idea of you know
regulation slowing down businesses. And
there seems to be certainly a dereg bent
in the Trump administration and a
general sense that all these rules and
bureaucracy really slow things down. And
so I'm curious, what's the process been
like for you in opening the pizza
restaurant? How long have you been doing
it? And I guess how much paperwork have
you actually had to do?
>> Well, Los Angeles in within the
restaurant world is fairly famous for
the ineptitude of its governmental
oversight agencies. We have to sort of
deal with both the county and the city.
There's building and safety and the
health department. They don't talk to
each other, but you're they're both kind
of looking at the same thing, and they
both point you in different directions,
and it gets very complicated when the
inspectors start showing up, which is
throughout the process. The thing about
the pizza place is that it was a second
gen space. It was already a pizzeria.
That said, we're, you know, stripping
out all the equipment and rebuilding it.
But that makes the process significantly
faster. And if I, you know, I don't want
to say anything uh or be an absolutist
in any way, but I will never do a firstg
space ever again. Um because it's just
excruciating. And you know, when we
opened the restaurant, we signed our
lease in November of 2019. So taking you
know, obviously there's a pandemic to
consider, but it took us three years to
open. A lot of that was due to problems
with the city. You know, a lot of it is
very analog. they print up your
application and it sits on a literal
stack on someone's desk and if you don't
follow up with them incessantly that
stack just gets piled on top and your
thing just disappears deep into the uh
you know into the pile. So it's it's a
very very very difficult process. Do I
think the exact opposite just stripping
down things to nothing is the is the uh
answer? Definitely not. But you know LA
has a lot of red tape to navigate. It
also is expensive red tape to navigate.
Um, so you're paying a ton for, you
know, sort of non-service and making
things really complicated for you. You
can get to the very very end of the
finish line and you're you're ready to
open and the health inspector walks in
on the last day and says, "This floor
drain is not in the right place based on
the plans that they approved and you
know, eight months ago from somebody
else." Uh, and then you have no choice
but to spend an extra $8,000
rerouting your plumbing and then getting
plumbing inspection again.
>> It sounds like you're speaking from
personal experience on that one. That's
a very specific example.
>> Well, no. I mean, uh, by the way, I I
looked at Kohl's uh, the restaurant you
mentioned and I'm reading the article
and it talked the quote litany of
reasons for it closing, pandemic, actor
and writer strike, crime, labor costs,
bureaucracy, etc. But just on this
point, like I have never worked in a um
actually I did work in well actually
I've worked
>> you worked at the sandwich shop
>> and I and I worked in a Nigerian
restaurant in uh college which I never
talk about but is it like the bear
basically that's all cuz when people
hear all of this stuff about like oh you
got to move the drain. What was there
was like something with a balloon or
something like that? I don't remember
the exact scene but is it like that
stressful where like you know they come
in and everyone's like on baited breath
about whether they see something or not
before you can open the door. 100% 100%.
The the the fear that is struck into the
hearts of restaurant managers when uh
someone with a hanging neck tag comes in
from the city is overwhelming. the
messages on Slack go immediately out and
everyone springs into gear because a lot
of the things that they require are not
logical, don't make sense, are there for
the purposes of checking some ridiculous
box from 1965 that isn't applicable
anymore, but no one wants to make the
effort to change things with the state
government or the county government. and
you just kind of get locked into,
you know, for for someone who is so
focused on logic and the logical
approach to things and really reasoning
things out and finding out the best way
forward, it's just in excruciatingly
frustrating to be put in this position
where nothing is logical. And the
decisions of this individual largely
have to do with their mood that day or
whether they don't whether they like
your place or whether they like you or
whatever is going on. it could be
motivated not by anything on paper but
more about this sort of unknowable
nuance. Uh and it's excruciatingly
frustrating. There are, you know, known
inspectors that people fear. There are
known inspectors that people hope for
and you never know what you're going to
get. There's I I heard stories of so a
lot of architecture companies have sort
of sprung out into become expediters as
well. So they basically are will take
all of your paperwork and the ridiculous
amount of stuff that you need to do. You
pay them a fixed fee and they're the
ones who not only well if they're
architects design the restaurant but
then we'll run everything through all
the necessary channels with the city and
the county um and the state and that
costs an incredible amount. So that's
another thing that gets you know piled
on top but no one wants to do that
anymore because it's so ludicrous that
it just makes your you go crazy. I hear
I have no experience outside of Los
Angeles that this this infrastructure is
one of the the worst out there.
>> So Joe uh listed a bunch of reasons that
a restaurant might close earlier, but I
would love to get your take on what
exactly is causing restaurants to go out
of business in LA. And also one thing
I've always wondered about, why do
people still open restaurants? Because
the thing you hear is always that like
it's a tiny tiny margin. It's really
difficult. It's really competitive. You
have to basically give your entire life
over to this endeavor. It sounds like a
hard job, but new restaurants open all
the time.
>> It's true. I think I'd say that the
motivation to open most restaurants is a
flawed motivation. It's usually based on
ego or showing off cash or trying to
acquire digital fame, other things that
will inevitably either lead to a short
burst of success followed by an
immediate decline or just an immediate
uh misfire. Um, and that's why most
restaurants close in the first year
because it's excruciatingly difficult to
do this. And I think that the general
view is that working in a restaurant is
easy. It's a copout from some more
corporate approach to living and it's
just not. It's so much less manageable.
It's so much wilder than you know a more
corporate career that it makes it very
very hard to do. But there is, to answer
your question, incredible joy in
interfacing with people and making them
happy and being connected to hospitality
and the pleasure of taking care of
people and giving them something that
they get to do, you know, three times a
day, but making it something that brings
them joy. You can see that and that
reverberates back to you in a way that
feels far more authentic than it felt
when I was writing and producing
commercials trying to manipulate people
into buying It's about that
authentic connection and I don't want to
have to feel bad for what I do for the
rest of my life. I don't want to have to
feel bad about it. And I did that for
for almost a decade. And I think that
this provides a a authentic reality for
me and the people that work here despite
all of the challenges of doing it. And I
think the challenges are in place
because the challenges are are always in
place when you're trying to do something
that's authentic and aside from the
general flow of our sort of controlled
existence that we have right now.
>> You you mentioned digital fame at your
uh at the pizzeria at the restaurant. Do
you feel like the need to have your
equivalent of like, you know, the viral
arrowan smoothie like something like is
that an important thing you think about
that this is a thing that could blow up
on TikTok or whatever it is?
>> No. No. But I'm I'm unique in that way.
I can't wait to remove us from social
media. That is a intractable connection.
Here's how I think about it now. where
the restaurant and the bakery are
established. Generally, people in Los
Angeles know to some degree or people
who are involved in food know who we
are. If I were to seek new customers in
this moment for our retail restaurant,
they would be inauthentic connections
with what we do. They might resonate
with some with our BLT that we just put
out first when the tomatoes are good now
in the summer and they might come to the
restaurant on the weekend, but
ultimately our bread and butter is going
to be our regular return customers who
have a relationship at the restaurant
and I don't want to ostracize them
because they're the people who are going
to keep us here for a decade as opposed
to the people who are going to make us
famous in the moment, drive out our
regular customers and then move on to
the next trendy thing. So for us, trends
are are a business killer. You can get
short short success from a trend, but if
you want to be here for a long time and
build a customer base that's dedicated,
you have to have an authentic
relationship with those people. And that
has to mean that whatever your product
is, they are authentically connecting
with it because of their own desires,
not because I'm forcing them to have an
entertainment moment with our product
by, you know, creating a Tik Tok video
that goes viral. So that's Yeah.
>> Well, speaking of the moment, we're
recording this on July 8th and we we
still don't really know what's happening
with the tariffs, but I imagine in the
course of building out a pizzeria,
you're probably ordering equipment from
various places, uh, giant pizza ovens
and all that. Have you been impacted at
all by the tariffs yet?
>> Very little. It's still very confusing
from my vantage point as to what is
happening or what is supposed to come
down the road. And we were certainly
anticipating, you know, our ovens are
from Germany. Our, you know, a variety
of pieces of equipment are coming from
international places, but I I haven't
seen any major increases. We did have
some shipping increases. We make these
coffee cans that we serve our roasted
coffee in that come from China. there
was a massive tariff increase on our
shipping. That's part of the process.
But in terms of, you know, the pizzeria
equipment, we haven't seen it really.
I'm anticipating that potentially we're
talking about a 10% EU tariff, they
said, floating around. I I just don't
know what that means. And if there's
anticipatory price increases from the
vendors who are in Italy, say selling us
tomatoes or who are in a variety of
other places in Europe where we buy some
of our more luxurious ingredients. Um we
we just haven't seen those yet. I am in
still anticipating that as a possibility
for pizza because we need to anticipate
that and we are certainly testing
tomatoes. California tomatoes um to see
if we can find something comparable
because the the you know um uh
samarzanos are truly the best and they
do grow in California but it's just a
little bit of a different thing. So, we
are anticipating the need to work with
California tomatoes. Uh, but so far have
not seen anything really in terms of uh
uh tariffs uh increases reaching us on
this side.
>> I just have one last question and it
gets back to Los Angeles. It feels like
major American cities are always sort of
dying and thriving at the same time. And
obviously Los Angeles, you know, you
hear certainly hear about it in New York
and Chicago and u Los Angeles is going
through a lot. There were the uh fires,
>> the recent ice raids and riots and then
you know the people what people and I
mention you know because it was in this
article I just looked up and reminded me
you know people are talking about
Hollywood could it become the next
Detroit in terms of that industry
gutting out? on the other hand, it's
probably the nicest climate in the
entire world and people are always going
to want to live in Southern California.
How do you feel about doing business in
Los Angeles right now as a city?
>> It's excruciating. Um, this city is is
uh especially in the in the food
business is is very very much
struggling. Um, I've never ever seen so
many closures of restaurants, good ones,
that deserve to be open, um, in my time,
you know, let alone being a consumer,
but being in the business. Um, I think
that, uh, there's a an endless list of
factors that make Los Angeles
complicated, its expanse, the reliance
on Hollywood as a major, you know,
motivator for or a major provider for a
large number of people in terms of
income. And with that whole market
shrinking, you know, you do see a a lot
less b business happening in Hollywood
proper. That said, it's a 400 square
mile city. You have, you know, where
where we are is about 15 minutes from
downtown where some of the protests were
happening and a lot of that stuff, but I
don't see anything. You know, it's just
a regular small small neighborhood
experience over here. Um, and you're
really kind of like these neighborhoods
have a very distinctly, you know, unique
way of behaving. So, as Hollywood is
sort of shrinking down and moving east
and west, you see a lot of development
and then you also see a lot of
gentrification protests. You see a lot
of things where folks are uh there's a
lot of expansion and contraction in this
really wide city. Part of it is exciting
because it's dynamic, but it's also just
makes things very difficult because the
city doesn't really have its own
identity. The identity is defined by the
neighborhood. So, as downtown and
Hollywood are contracting, you know,
Highland Park and Glassell Park and this
area of Glendale kind of on the east
side is expanding. Silverl and Echo Park
and Los Filas are kind of becoming like
Hollywood once was and getting a little
bit more corporate businesses in there
and they're all looking to capitalize on
the growth of these neighborhoods. It's
it's a very unique place and it but it's
it's very hard to work here and you you
get a lot for choosing to be here and
operating here and living here, but
you're also very much uh behind the
eight-ball. I got to ask one more
question, but why is a San Marzano
tomato grown in California considered
subpar to a San Marzano tomato grown in
Italy?
>> I wouldn't say subpar. I wouldn't say
subpar. The climate is vaguely
different. Uh, slightly different. So,
you end up with a little bit different
result. From what we've seen, the
Samaranos from Italy end up being a
little bit sweeter, um, a little bit
more robust. And maybe that has to do
with even more direct sunlight, more
volcanic soil. Who knows? There's a
variety of different different reasons
why the microclimates create slightly
different and results. It's just like
wine. It's sort of like, you know, you
can grow the same grape in southern
France and in Northern California and
end up with a distinctly different
flavor based on the microclimate, the
soil, and the environment. So, it's uh
it may just be our own projection, but
we're working to try and find whatever
the uh the best possible option is for
us.
>> All right, just a couple seconds left.
Give us one sandwich recommendation here
on the East Coast that we should try.
>> Well, I would say Oh, that's really
hard.
>> I know you're going to
>> I mean, Deontes Defontes in Brooklyn is
is a special spot, but you know, the the
the deli that I grew up with is in
Milbour, New Jersey. It's the Milbour
Deli and has now become kind of like a
famous deli somehow, which is crazy.
>> I'll check it out.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Well, Andy, thank you so much
for coming on OddLots. We're going to
have to leave it there, but uh it was
really fun to talk about the baking
business with you.
>> Yeah, that was great. Thanks so much,
Andy.
>> Yeah, it's my pleasure. Thanks, guys.
[Music]
Joe, have you ever been to Alidoros?
>> No. In Soho.
>> It's in Soho. It used to be literally
across the street from where I lived.
Best sandwiches ever. It blew my mind
the first time I went there. They've
expanded since then. The uh expanded
store is not so good.
>> You know, shout out to our producer Dash
cuz didn't he like he did that tour
where he like tried every one of the 100
best sandwiches in New York City. We got
to get him on.
>> We should interview Dash. We should do a
lot more with Dash at some point about
New York City sandwich.
>> That'd be fun. Okay. But on a more
serious note, there was lots of
interesting stuff to pull out from
there. But one of the things I'm
thinking about, and this kind of came up
in our chicken series, uh, when we
talked to the DOJ, but it's that idea of
the tyranny of the middleman, right? And
this idea that okay, obviously you're
buying flour from a flower producer, but
then in between the producer and it
getting to you, there's the distributor
which is charging a markup. And then
when you're setting up a new business
nowadays, you have to have like
basically a red tape sherpa to walk you
through. That's another middleman. And
then the shipping costs going up. I
mean, shipping not necessarily a
middleman, but certainly the middle of
the process. It seems like that's where
the cost pressures are really coming in.
No, I I think all that's super
interesting. Also, this idea that like
you could have an Uber for distribution,
but then you lose that
>> a bread bus,
>> but then you lose that personal
relationship. And if that's important
because you need to hear feedback from
the chef at that restaurant, then you
don't get it. If you don't own the
distribution,
>> um, and then just, you know, LA itself,
we should do at some point we got to go
back to LA because it does, I mean,
incredible place, but incredibly number
of like sort of ranching things going on
in that city. And opening a restaurant,
as you mentioned, sort of seems crazy in
the easiest of times. Like I feel like
you have to have a little bit of brain
damage to do that. And then to do it in
uh there's a lot there that was very
interesting.
>> I want to learn more about the pizza
business as well. We're in New York. We
should do pizza.
>> We're going to do a pizza episode.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman-Synan at
Dashbot and Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks.
And for more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about baked goods, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]